Reference Counting - The Solution and the Missing Pieces
========================================================

**Author**: DannyNiu/NJF, **Email**: dannyniu (at) hotmail (dot) com.

**Abstract**

Reference counting is a popular method of resource management. It has just
one small problem - circular reference would cause leak. This one problem
is often solved through use of *weak references*. In this essay, 

1. we provide convincing argument that objects of certain relationships should 
   use strong or weak references,

2. prescribe a set of propositions based on observations made on typical
   resource management paradigms, as the formal results of this essay.

Parent-Child Object Hierarchy
=============================

Being a child of a parent object, there must be a counted reference somewhere
in the hierarchy from that parent to the child. But if the child wants to 
identify its context by having a reference to the parent, the reference ought
to be weak:

- The parent needs to retain a reference count to the child, to ensure its
  reference is valid for as long as the child object IS a child of the
  said parent.

- The child does not need a strong reference to the parent, because for as long
  as it's a child of the said parent, its (weak) reference to the parent 
  will be valid. Because by definition, parent objects live for longer duration
  than their child objects.

Hence the 1st proposition of this essay:

> For parent and child objects, by logic and definition, parent objects should
> have strong reference to their child objects; child objects should have weak
> reference to their parent object should such reference exist.

Subject Scope and Object Lifetime
=================================

Before we discuss objects of non-parent-child relationship, we first discuss
2 kinds of entities.

Subject Scope
-------------

Here, we define a "*subject*" as an execution flow - typically, it's a running
thread, or a subroutine it had called. The subroutines in an execution flow
can have semantic blocks - take the C language for example, variables declared
in the scope of a block are automatically freed when the block ends.

Subject scopes are important, because their starting and ending points are
the clearest indicators for lifetime of objects - all automatic variables are
allocated on the stack when entering the scope, and deallocated when exiting 
the scope, and they're easiest to reason with.

Object Lifetime
---------------

The objects we're referring to here, has the same definition as that in the
C language specification - roughly speaking: the value that a variable holds.
And by extension, the object we're referring to here, include those 
participating in reference counted resource management.

In a loose sense, all objects have a parent - the subject scope that they're
living in. And because the scopes are stack spaces allocated by the 
subroutines, all object can root their parents to the stacks of threads.

In fact, all object that doesn't directly have a subject scope as their parent,
**MUST** have a indirect parent that's rooted in one, otherwise, this object
results in a memory leak. Putting it together, we have the 2nd proposition:

> All objects that're not rooted in a subject scope must have or indirectly 
> have a parent object that's rooted in one. 

as well as the 3rd proposition:

> All objects that're rooted in a scope, are rooted in the largest outter-most
> scope where it begin and ends its life time.

This 3rd proposition is meant to serve as a guideline, as to when an object 
should be retained and released by the calling thread. For automatic variables,
this is guaranteed by the defined feature of the C language; for objects
participating in the RCDT resource management, this is requested explicitly.

Objects of Non-Parent-Child Relationships
=========================================

The only form of non-parent-child relationship between objects A and B, is when
the following sequence of events occurs:

1. A is created, 
2. B is created,
3. A is destroyed,
4. B is destroyed,

There are several cases of this relationship. Apart from this relationship and 
the parent-child relationship, is "no relationship", which is too trivial 
to be discussed.

The cases where 1 & 2 happen in a subscope and where 3 & 4 happen in a subscope
are also trivial, as it's plausible that a single subroutine being the creator
or destructor of 2 objects. So the only interesting case for us would be where
2 & 3 happen in a subscope.

The case where 1 thru 4 all happen in the same scope is also trivial. It has
very clear indication of when and where creation and destruction of A and B 
occur. This works like managing local variables in the local scope.

We discuss the relationships in the "inner-most scope where the creation and
destruction of A and B can be observed in linear fashion" - because in an
outter scope, we have nothing meaningful to discuss; and in an inner scope, 
the process is too broken to be observed.

Case 1. A is Consumed in a Subscope where B is Created
------------------------------------------------------

**Scenario 1** A gets released and is no longer valid after this point.

**Scenario 2** A gets retained and remains usable after this point.

**Scenario 3** A is "moved" to B, and will get released just before B does.

Case 2. B is Extracted from A in a Subscope
-------------------------------------------

Also several scenarios:

**Scenario 1**: A is released in this subscope and is no longer valid.

**Scenario 2**: A remains valid.
                The reference count of B may or may not be incremented.

In both of these cases and all scenarios, the subroutine(s) should document 
the behavior.

The non-parent-child relationship is perhaps the most complicated form of 
relationship that can occur in a reference counted system, and I've probably 
missed many other possible cases and scenarios. **Avoiding it** is probably the
best solution, but in case that'd become impossible, the 4th proposition:

> Middlewares managing resource on behalf of its caller MUST document its
> behavior with regard to creating, retaining, and releasing of resources,
> in sufficient detail such that caller can correctly manage some of the
> resource by itself should they desire to.

Summary
=======

- We've discussed that, in a parent-child relationship, convincing reason why
  the child doesn't need a strong reference to the parent. 

- We established the concepts "Subject Scope" and "Object Lifetime" as basis 
  for tracing object lifetime to the lifetime of block scopes of subroutines, 
  and thus able to treat (and manage) them like automatic local variables. 

- We discussed shortly the edge case of non-parent-child relationship, and put
  responsibility of documenting resource management behavior on middleware
  vendors.
