The Circular Reference Problem of Reference Counting
====================================================

**Author**: DannyNiu/NJF, **Email**: dannyniu (at) hotmail (dot) com.

Problem Statement
=================

Reference counting is a popular way of resource management. 
The circular-reference problem is when a group of object refer to each other
forming a circle, and causing release calls to fail to free up the said
group of resources, resulting in "leak".

I have 2 observations on this:

1. circular reference problem arise when we conflate resource management with
   data structure. When the group of objects are released individually, and
   not retained when assigned to each other, leak won't occur.

2. When an object A is retained by an object B, the intent is that, 
   the lifetime of A be managed through B - while straightforward for
   simple "hierarchical" cases, such relationship isn't clear with cases like
   that of circular references.

After this problem statement, is a series of proposal statements. 
None of these are new or invalidate previous efforts. They serve to provide
insights that can be adopted and practiced.

Proposal Statement 1
====================

When we really need to construct data structure with cycles, we borrow some
experience from file systems. Many programmers are familiar with the 
symbolic link mechanism from Unix-like systems - they refer to another
file or directory using relative or absolute paths; they're also known as
"soft" links. 

Circular reference in the case of file system, is exactly a directory 
containing some entry/entries that allows traversal to itself. While hard links
to directories hasn't been prohibited by POSIX / Single Unix Specification, it
causes trouble with `fsck`, and majority of the user utilities that don't 
expect them.

Symbolic links corresponds to what's known as "weak" references, whose typical
implementation in reference counted data type schemes are references that don't
increment reference counts.

Here, we make an observation on parent-child object relationship:

3. When A is referred to by B, B need to have a strong reference to A to ensure
   the reference is valid; on the contrary, B don't need a strong reference by
   A, because it's a parent of A, which means it's valid for the lifetime of A
   BY-DEFINITION.

Proposal Statement 2
====================

When we're constructing some kind of complex data structures (such as free-form
graphs), we can have:

- 1 set of data structures with weak references, e.g. for the said graph, 
- 1 container object containing all of the object in the data structure
  with strong references.

Under this setup, it's much easier and clearer to manage the resources 
used by the data structure, by operating on the container, while altering
the data structure.

I suggest whenever a set of object have close but unclear relationships,
they be related by weak references, and have resources managed by a strong-ref
container. This separates data structure and resource management concerns as
mentioned in observation 1.
